Add documentation on how to handle moving meshes (#381)
precice/precice.github.io: pages/docs/couple-your-code/couple-your-code-moving-or-changing-meshes.md

---
title: Moving or changing meshes
permalink: couple-your-code-moving-or-changing-meshes.html
keywords: api, adapter, ALE, geometries, CFD
summary: "preCICE supports ALE-methods, direct-mesh-access, and pseudo-meshes to handle most scenarios of moving or changing meshes. A remeshing API is on the roadmap and being actively developped."
---

## Static reference domain

> preCICE supports static meshes, meaning dynamic meshes can still be emulated using node displacements as described by the Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian or ALE-methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
preCICE supports static meshes, meaning moving geometries can still be emulated using node displacements as described by the Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian or ALE-methods.
```

Note that spatially aware mapping-schemes in preCICE work in the reference domain, not the physical domain.

Examples of this method are the [perpendicular flap tutorials](tutorials-perpendicular-flap) and the [Turek-Hron FSI3 benchmark](tutorials-turek-hron-fsi3).

## Mapping inside adapter

> In some cases, the mesh of a participant may fluctuate extremely between timestep or it may be unclear, where exactly sampling points are needed for following timesteps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, the mesh of a participant may fluctuate extremely between time steps or it may be unclear, where exactly sampling points are needed for following time steps.
```

At some point, we fixed that we use "time step" not "timestep".

> This is common for Discrete Element Methods, where particle centers are often points of interest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes particle methods, such as the Discrete Element Method (DEM), where particle centers are often points of interest.
```

Various data types can then be converted to `double` and written as `scalar` and `vector` data to those nodes.
This can include a boolean data which encodes if a node is active or not.
The adapters can now dynamically use these nodes by writing `1.0` or `0.0` to the `active` data of the local mesh.

This method trades communication efficiency for flexibility, as data is always stored as doubles and will always be fully transferred.

```xml
<data:scalar name="active" />   <!-- Boolean 0.0 for off, 1.0 for on -->
<data:vector name="position" />
<data:scalar name="..." />      <!-- define more properties as needed -->
```

Note that inactive nodes can lead to numerical instabilities in some acceleration schemes.

## Remeshing using preCICE

{% important %}
This feature is in active development and not yet released. This section is part of the roadmap!
{% endimportant %}

**Goal** of the remeshing support in preCICE to allow resetting meshes at runtime.

To change a mesh dynamically at runtime:

```python
if (my_solver_wants_to_remesh):
    # reset the mesh
    participant.reset_mesh(mesh)
    # redefine the mesh

>     new_ids = participnat.set_mesh_vertices(mesh, new_coordinates)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    new_ids = participant.set_mesh_vertices(mesh, new_coordinates)
```

    # write data to the newly defined mesh
    participant.write_data(mesh, data, new_ids, new_values)

# preCICE automatically handles the mesh change
participant.advance(dt)
```

> This feature comes with serious runtime implications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature comes with runtime implications.
```

> Changing a mesh, changes data-mapping schemes on the local as well as the receiving participant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changing a mesh changes data-mapping schemes on the local as well as the receiving participant.
```
